---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright (c) 2013-2016 The University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand.
All rights reserved.

This code has been developed by the University of Waikato WAND network
research group. For further information please see http://www.wand.net.nz/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

AMP is a system designed to continuously perform active network measurements
between a mesh of specialist monitor machines, as well as to other targets of
interest. These measurements are used to provide both a view of long-term
network performance as well as to detect notable network events when they
happen.

The amplet2 package is the client portion of the system and is responsible for
performing the measurements - it should be run on each of the measurement
probes. There is also a server portion that is responsible for storing the
measurements and making them available to view via a website.


AMP has a number of tests built in to it that cover a variety of areas. Some
of them are designed to measure raw network performance while others are aimed
at specific pieces of network infrastructure. Some of these tests require that
the destination host also be running the AMP software while others merely
require that the service being tested is present and accepting the traffic
from the monitor machine. Tests currently available include:

 * ICMP latency
 * TCP latency
 * UDP DNS latency
 * UDP latency and jitter
 * TCP throughput
 * HTTP performance


The AMP software originated at NLANR as part of the Active Measurement Project
led by Tony McGregor. At the time, AMP was the largest and most widespread
active measurement system. It was designed for high performance research and
education networks, especially the US Internet2 networks and was deployed on
networks in 11 countries, with approximately 140 measurement points worldwide.
Since then, AMP has been developed and maintained by the WAND Network Research
Group at the University of Waikato, who use it to measure the performance of
the New Zealand networks.

This package is a rewrite and reimagining of the software originally written
by Tony McGregor.


Bugs should be reported by either emailing contact@wand.net.nz or filing an
issue at https://github.com.wanduow/amplet2

It is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2. Please
see the included file COPYING for details of this license.

For further information please contact the WAND group. See
http://www.wand.net.nz/ for details.
